## Vector Space

### Field

A field is an algebraic structure constituted by a set and two operations, addition and multiplication, defined for all elements of the set. An informal explanation is that a field is where arithmetic takes place. Common fields includes the real number field $\mathbb{R}$, complex number field $\mathbb{C}$, etc.

### Vector Space

A vector space $V$ over a field $F$ is a set where the following conditions are satisfied. Then, we refer to the elements of $V$ as "vectors" and those of $F$ as "scalars".

Firstly two vector operations should be defined.

- Scalar multiplication, $\bold{w} =a\bold{v}$ ,  where $a \in F, \bold{v}, \bold{w}\in V$.

- Vector Addition, $\bold{w} = \bold{v} + \bold{u}$ ,  where $\bold{v}, \bold{u}, \bold{w} \in V$.

And, the following 7 conditions should be satisfied $\forall \bold{u}, \bold{v}, \bold{w} \in V$ and $\forall a, b \in F$.

- Commutativity of vector addition.
  
  $$
  \bold{u} + \bold{v} = \bold{v} + \bold{u}
  $$

- Associativity of vector addition.
  
  $$
  (\bold{u} + \bold{v}) + \bold{w} = \bold{v} + (\bold{u} + \bold{w})
  $$

- Compatibility of scalar multiplication and field multiplication.
  
  $$
  (ab)\bold{u} = a(b\bold{u})
  $$

- Scalar multiplication identity.
  
  $$
  1\bold{u} = \bold{u}
  $$

- Vector addition identity.
  
  $$
  \exist\bold{0}\in V\;\forall\bold{u}\in V
\;(0\bold{u} = \bold{0})
  $$

- Distributivity of scalar sum.
  
  $$
  (a+b)\bold{u} = a\bold{u} + b\bold{u}
  $$

- Distributivity of vector sum.
  
  $$
  a(\bold{u} + \bold{v}) = a\bold{u} + a\bold{v}
  $$

##### Notes:

- Anything can be a "vector" as long as it, together with the scalar multiplication and vector addition defined for it, possess the above properties. Although they can be various, they have similar properties and work in similar ways with their own "scalar multiplications" and "vector additions", and can thus be subjected to similar operations to get similar results. It is always property that defines object.
- A field is a vector space over itself, so all scalars are vectors.

### Vector Subspace

#### Definition:

$W$ is a subspace of a vector space $V$ if and only if $W$ is a vector space and $W \subseteq V$.

#### Vector Subspace Theorem

A nonempty subset $W$ of a vector space $V$ is a subspace of $V$ if and only if the following two conditions are satisfied.

- It is closed under vector addition.
  
  $$
  \forall\bold{u},\bold{v}\in W\;(\bold{u}+\bold{v}\in W)
  $$

- It is closed under scalar multiplication.
  
  $$
  \forall\bold{u}\in W, c\in R\;(c\bold{u}\in W)
  $$

##### Notes:

- This can be useful for determining whether a nonempty set $W$ is a vector space. If $W$ is already a subset of another vector space, we only need to check the above two conditions. (In other words, they form a necessary and sufficient condition to "upgrade" a subset to a subspace.)

### Common Vector Spaces

#### Euclidean Space $\mathbb{R}^{n}$

$\mathbb{R}^{n}$ is the space of all $n$-vectors (or order $n$-tuples).

#### Function Space $V^X$

If $V$ is a vector space over $F$ and $X$ is a set, all functions $f:X\rightarrow V$ form a vector space over $F$, in which addition and scalar multiplication are defined as

$$
\begin{align*}
(f+g)(t) &\equiv f(t) + g(t) \\
(\alpha f)(t) &\equiv \alpha f(t)
\end{align*}
$$

and the zero vector is given by

$$
f(t) \equiv 0
$$

One useful function space is the continuous function space $\mathcal{C}^n(I)$. It is the space of all  functions defined on an interval $I$ and having a continuous $n$-th derivative. When $n$ is not specified, it denotes all continuous functions defined on $I$. 
