## Linear Differential Equations

### Definition

A linear differential equation has the form:

$$
L(\boldsymbol{y}) = f(t)\tag{1}
$$

where $L$ is a linear operator that involves derivatives or partial derivatives, and  $\boldsymbol{y} = (y^{(n)}, y^{(n-1)},...,y',y) $ is a vector with its components corresponded to the derivatives of the unknown functions in the equation.

Notes: 

- This definition is very similar to the definition of a linear algebraic equation.

### First Order Homogeneous Linear D.E.

#### Definition

A first order homogeneous linear D.E. has the following explicit form:

$$
\begin{aligned}
{dy \over dx} + p(x)y = 0\tag{2}
\end{aligned}
$$

Notes:

- This is consistent to $(1)$ because $L(\boldsymbol{y}) = {dy \over dx} + p(x)y$ is a linear operator.

$$
\begin{align*}
&
\begin{split}
L(\boldsymbol{y}_1 + \boldsymbol{y}_2) &= {d(y_1+y_2) \over dx}
+ p(x)(y_1+y_2) \\
&= {dy_1 \over dx} + p(x)y_1 + {dy_2 \over dx} + p(x)y_2 \\
&= L(\boldsymbol{y}_1) + L(\boldsymbol{y}_2)
\end{split} \\
& L(a\boldsymbol{y}_1) = {d(ay_1) \over dx} + p(x)ay_1 = a\left({dy_1 
\over dx} + p(x)y_1\right) = aL(\boldsymbol{y}_1)
\end{align*}
$$

It's tempting to think that $(1)$ is the general form. The correct general form, however, is the implicit form, which is:

$$
r(x){d\boldsymbol{y} \over dx} + h(x)\boldsymbol{y} = \boldsymbol{0}\tag{3}
$$

One may think that we can divide the both side by $r(x)$ and let ${h(x) \over r(x)} = p(x)$ to transform $(3)$ into $(2)$, but if $r(a) = 0$ we find that $(2)$ is not defined when $x=a$ but $(3)$ is. Yet, as long as we take care of zeros, we can always use the explicit form to solve problems.

#### Solving by the Separation of Variables

An explicit first order homogeneous linear D.E. can be solved easily by separating variables:

Assuming $y \ne 0$

$$
\begin{align*}
y' + p(x)y &= 0\\

\int {dy \over y dx} dx &= -\int p(x)dx\\

\ln|y| + C &= -\int p(x)dx\\

|y| &= e^{-\int p(x)dx - C}\\

y(x) &= Ae^{-\int p(x)dx}\tag{4}
\end{align*}
$$

where $C$ is an arbitrary real number, and $A = \pm e^{-C}$ is an arbitrary non-zero real number.

Additionally, the equilibrium solution is $y(x) = 0$ . We can include this in $(4)$ by allowing $A$ to be zero.

#### Note:

- $(4)$ is *the general* solution of the equation.
- Separation of variables relies on integration by substitution (left-hand side of step 2), which then relies on the chain rule.

### Solving Non-homogeneous First Order Linear DEs

Consider the following non-homogeneous linear DE:

$$
y' + p(x)y = f(x) \tag{5}
$$

For clarity, let $y_p$ be a *particular* solution of $(5)$, $y$ be the *general* solution of $(5)$, $y_{hp}$ be a *particular* solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation $(2)$, and  $y_h$ be the *general* solution of $(2)$.

Then, we can solve (5) using the following two techniques.

#### Variation of Variable

Applying the non-homogeneous principle, we can write $y = y_p + y_h$. To find a particular solution $y_p$, the idea is to transform a $y_{hp}$ . In other words, we want to find a function $g$ such that, for some $y_{hp}$ , $g(y_{hp}(x))$ is a solution of $(5)$. And, we expect $g$ to depend on $x$ and the selection of $y_{hp}$ but no more, so that we can find a $y_p$ easily. However, it is impossible to find $g$ just from the above information, so we guess that $g$ has the form:

$$
g(y_{hp}(x)) = v(x)y_{hp}(x)
$$

So, 

$$
y_p(x) =  v(x)y_{hp}(x)
$$

Then, we try to find $v(x)$. Since $y_p$ is a solution to $(5)$, we have

$$
\begin{align*}
(vy_h)' + pvy_{hp} &= f\\
v'y_{hp} + vy_{hp}'+ pvy_{hp} &= f \\
v'y_{hp} + v(y_{hp}'+ py_{hp}) &= f \tag{6}
\end{align*}
$$

Since $y_{hp}$ is a solution of $(2)$,

$$
y_{hp}'+ py_{hp} = 0
$$

So, $(6)$ can be rewritten as

$$
\begin{align*}
v'y_{hp} &= f\\
v(x) &= \int {f(x) \over y_{hp}(x)} dx
\end{align*}
$$

Note that we don't need a constant here because we only need *one* $v(x)$ that defines *one* $g(y_{hp}(x))$ to get the job done: to give us *one* $y_p(x)$ :

$$
y_p(x) = g(y_{hp}(x)) = v(x)y_{hp}(x) = 
y_{hp}(x)\int {f(x) \over y_{hp}(x)} dx
$$

Then, the general solution of $(5)$ is

$$
\begin{split}
y(x) &= y_p(x) + y_h(x)\\
&= y_{hp}(x) \left( \int{f(x) \over y_{hp}(x)} dx \right) + y_h(x) \\
&= e^{-\int p(x)dx} \left( \int f(x) e^{\int p(x)dx} dx \right) +
Ae^{-\int p(x)dx} \tag{7}
\end{split}
$$

where $A$ is a real number.

#### Integral Factor

Using integral factor, we can handle first order linear DEs more conveniently. The basic idea is to solve $(5)$ by solving other separable DEs.

Now, we consider our equation again:

$$
y' + p(x)y = f(x) \tag{5}
$$

we find that it would be great if the left-hand side can be seen as the derivative of another unknown function. We also note that the left-hand side has two terms, which reminds us that 

$$
(uy)' = uy' + u'y \tag{8}
$$

We combine these thoughts and multiplying $(5)$ by an unknown function $u$

$$
u(x)y' + u(x)p(x)y = f(x)u(x) \tag{9}
$$

and we hope

$$
u(x)p(x) = u' \tag{10}
$$

so that $(9)$ conform with $(8)$. From $(10)$ we have

$$
\begin{align*}
\int p(x) dx &= \int {u'(x) \over u(x)}dx \\
\ln(|u|) + C &= \int p(x) dx \\
u &= Ae^{\int p(x)dx} \tag{11}
\end{align*}
$$

where $A = \pm e^{-C}$ is an arbitrary non-zero real number. Here, we should remember that our goal is just to find *one* $u$ that satisfies $(10)$ . So, we can safely let $A = 1$ , and get

$$
u = e^{\int p(x)dx} \tag{12}
$$

We know that this $u$ satisfies $(10)$, so we can rewrite $(9)$ as 

$$
\begin{align*}
u(x)y' + u'(x)y &= f(x)u(x) \\
(uy)' &= f(x)u(x) \\
uy &= \int f(x)u(x)dx + C \\
y(x) &= {1\over u}\int f(x)u(x)dx + {C \over u} \tag{13}
\end{align*}
$$

it is obvious that this is consistent with $(7)$ .
