## Matrix Fundamentals

### Definition & Terms

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers. An $m\times n$ matrix is that with $m$ rows and $n$ columns.

$$
\begin{matrix}
a_{11} &a_{12} &\dots &a_{1n} \\
a_{21} &a_{22} &\dots &a_{2n} \\
\vdots &\vdots &\ddots &\vdots \\
a_{m1} &a_{m2} &\dots &a_{mn} \\
\end{matrix}
\;or\; [a_{ij}]
$$

Each row of a matrix is called a row vector, and each column of a matrix is called a column vector.

### Simple Matrix Arithmetics

#### Scalar Multiplication

For a real number $c$ , and a matrix $\boldsymbol{A} = [a_{ij}]$ ,

$$
c\boldsymbol{A} = [ca_{ij}] = [a_{ij}c] = \boldsymbol{A}c
$$

#### Addition

For two matrix of the same size, 

$$
\boldsymbol{A} + \boldsymbol{B} = [a_{ij}+b_{ij}]
$$

#### Transpose

For a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ ,

$$
\boldsymbol{A}^T = [a_{ij}]^T = [a_{ji}]
$$

### Matrix Multiplication

#### Definition:

For an  $m \times r$ matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ and an $r \times n$ matrix $\boldsymbol{B}$, we write $\boldsymbol{C} =\boldsymbol{A}\boldsymbol{B}$ if and only if 

$$

c_{ij} = \sum^{r}_{k=1}a_{ik}b_{kj} \tag{1}
$$

#### Explanations:

The first explanation of $(1)$ is that "the $ij$th entry of new matrix $C$ is the scalar product of the $i$th row vector of $\boldsymbol{A}$ and the $j$th column vector of  $\boldsymbol{B}$" (page 123 on our textbook). We can also connect this understanding with linear equation system by viewing each row of $\boldsymbol{A}$ as a linear operator, each column of $\boldsymbol{B}$ as an operand and each entry of $C$ as the corresponding result.



Another explanation is obtained from the fact that

$$
\begin{align*}
c_{ij} &= \sum^{r}_{k=1}a_{ik}b_{kj} \\
\Longrightarrow c_{*j} &= \sum^{r}_{k=1}a_{*k}b_{kj}
\end{align*}
$$

where $c_{*j}$ and $a_{*k}$ are the $j$th column of $\boldsymbol{C}$ and $k$th column of $\boldsymbol{A}$, respectively. This means that we can view each column of $\boldsymbol{A}$ as a basis and each column of $\boldsymbol{B}$ as a vector, whose basis were originally the standard basis; then, the corresponding column of $\boldsymbol{C}$ is the result of replacing the standard basis with the columns of $\boldsymbol{A}$. This explanation can be extremely helpful when considering the column space of $\boldsymbol{A}$ , and it is also more intuitive when considering matrices as linear transformations.

#### Properties:

- Non-commutativity. In general case, we cannot guarantee that $\boldsymbol{A}\boldsymbol{B} = \boldsymbol{B}\boldsymbol{A}$ .

- Associativity. $(\boldsymbol{A}\boldsymbol{B})\boldsymbol{C} = \boldsymbol{A}(\boldsymbol{B}\boldsymbol{C})$ . This can be intuitive under the basis replacing explanation.

- Distributivity. $(\boldsymbol{A} + \boldsymbol{B})\boldsymbol{C} = \boldsymbol{A}\boldsymbol{C} + \boldsymbol{B}\boldsymbol{C}$ , and $\boldsymbol{C}(\boldsymbol{A} + \boldsymbol{B}) = \boldsymbol{C}\boldsymbol{A} + \boldsymbol{C}\boldsymbol{B}$ . This can be intuitive under the operator explanation. 


